README.md, before:

# Job Shop Schedule Problem (JSP)

This problem was given to us by [Quad Graphics](https://www.quad.com/) in a mathematics course titled *Math 490: Preparation for Industrial Careers: Solving Industrial and Applied Problems in Teams* (sponsered by [PIC Math](https://www.maa.org/programs-and-communities/professional-development/pic-math)) during the Spring 2019 semester.

**Team**  
[Matthew McFadden](https://github.com/mcfadd)  
[Jessica Wolfson](https://github.com/JFWolfson)  
[Maddie Kenney](https://github.com/MaddieKenney)  
[Anthony Valdez ](https://github.com/avaldez96)  

## Problem

The specific JSP problem this program attempts to solve is classified as the 
**Partial Flexible Job Shop Scheduling Problem With Sequence Dependent Setup Times**  
For more information on JSP see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Job_shop_scheduling.

**Description**

Given m machines with different run speeds and n jobs which have a varying number of tasks that need to be completed, create a program that schedules the tasks from all jobs on the machines such that the completion time (i.e. make span) is minimized.

**Additional Information**  
* Each Task has a set amount of pieces that needs to be processed for the task to be complete.
* The machines all have different run speeds.
* Certain tasks can be run in parallel on these machines.
* Each task has a sequence dependent setup time. Setup times are encoded in sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv, where the columns represent the preceding job task, and the rows represent the current job task.
* If a task is the first to run on a machine there will be no setup time.

**Constraints**  
* On a machine, there can be no overlap in start and end times for any job task.
* Tasks within the same job cannot be started unless all other tasks within the same job with a sequence number less than the current task are complete.
* Each task can only be run on certain machines.
* The program must produce a schedule in 10 minutes or less.

**Data**  
* [jobTasks.csv](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/tree/master/data/data_set2/jobTasks.csv)
* [machineRunSpeed.csv](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/blob/master/data/data_set2/machineRunSpeed.csv)
* [sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/blob/master/data/data_set2/sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv)

## Solution Formulation

We formulate a solution as a list of operations where and operation consists of JobId, taskId, sequence number, and machine for the task to run on. The order of the list determines the order in which the operations are scheduled.

For example, below is a feasible solution to a problem instance with 3 jobs, and 2 machine.  
Each row represents an operation in the form [jobId, taskId, sequence number, machine number, pieces].  

```python
[[0, 0, 0, 0, 10],
 [0, 1, 1, 1, 5],
 [1, 0, 0, 1, 8],
 [2, 0, 0, 0, 8],
 [1, 1, 1, 0, 5]]
```

Here is an example of an infeasible solution:

```python
[[0, 1, 1, 0, 5],
 [0, 0, 0, 0, 10],
 [1, 0, 0, 1, 8],
 [2, 0, 0, 0, 8],
 [1, 1, 1, 0, 5]]
```

The solution is infeasible because job 0, task 1 with sequence = 1 is scheduled on machine 0 before job 0, task 0 with sequence = 0.

To calculate the make span of a feasible solution we calculate the max of (total run time + total wait time + total setup time) for each machine, where

* run time = task pieces / machine speed
* wait time = time a machine has to wait for a task with sequence < current task's sequence to be processed 
* setup time = set up time before processing the current task


To produce a schedule for each machine given a feasible solution, we iterate over the solution and add each Job-Task to a queue for the machine specified in the operation.

## Usage

**Reuirements**: python 3

1. clone or download repository
2. open a terminal and cd to the directory where the clone is
3. run one of the following

main:
```bash
python main.py [-h] -t <runtime> -s <tabu size> -n <neighborhood size> -w <neighborhood wait>  <data directory>
```

benchmark:
```bash
python benchmark.py [-h] -t <runtime> -s <tabu size> -n <neighborhood size> -w <neighborhood wait> -i <benchmark iterations>  <data directory>
```

<br>

**Argument Descriptions**  

| Arg | Description |
| --- | --- |
| -h | prints a help message |  
| -t | runtime in seconds for tabu search |
| -s | tabu list size |  
| -n | neighborhood size |
| -w | max time in seconds to wait for generating a neighborhood |  
| -i | number of tabu searches to benchmark |
| data_dir | directory containing the files: <br> 1. jobTasks.csv <br> 2. machineRunSpeed.csv <br> 3. sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv|  


**Example**  

`python main.py -t 600 -s 200 -n 100 -w 1 ./data/data_set2`

**Note**

Job-Tasks in jobTasks.csv and sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv need to be in ascending order according to their (job_id, task_id)  
(see csv files in [data](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/tree/master/data) for reference)

## Program Design

Below is a basic high-level flow digram describing the design.

![Flow Diagram](diagrams/Flow_Diagram.png)

Commit message:

created C-extensions using cython for computing makespan and generating neighbor. I then converted everything to work with numpy and cython. Finally, I created the cython_speedup branch for developement

README.md, after:

# Job Shop Schedule Problem (JSP)

This problem was given to us by [Quad Graphics](https://www.quad.com/) in a mathematics course titled *Math 490: Preparation for Industrial Careers: Solving Industrial and Applied Problems in Teams* (sponsered by [PIC Math](https://www.maa.org/programs-and-communities/professional-development/pic-math)) during the Spring 2019 semester.

**Team**  
[Matthew McFadden](https://github.com/mcfadd)  
[Jessica Wolfson](https://github.com/JFWolfson)  
[Maddie Kenney](https://github.com/MaddieKenney)  
[Anthony Valdez ](https://github.com/avaldez96)  

## Problem

The specific JSP problem this program attempts to solve is classified as the 
**Partial Flexible Job Shop Scheduling Problem With Sequence Dependent Setup Times**  
For more information on JSP see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Job_shop_scheduling.

**Description**

Given m machines with different run speeds and n jobs which have a varying number of tasks that need to be completed, create a program that schedules the tasks from all jobs on the machines such that the completion time (i.e. make span) is minimized.

**Additional Information**  
* Each Task has a set amount of pieces that needs to be processed for the task to be complete.
* The machines all have different run speeds.
* Certain tasks can be run in parallel on these machines.
* Each task has a sequence dependent setup time. Setup times are encoded in sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv, where the columns represent the preceding job task, and the rows represent the current job task.
* If a task is the first to run on a machine there will be no setup time.

**Constraints**  
* On a machine, there can be no overlap in start and end times for any job task.
* Tasks within the same job cannot be started unless all other tasks within the same job with a sequence number less than the current task are complete.
* Each task can only be run on certain machines.
* The program must produce a schedule in 10 minutes or less.

**Data**  
* [jobTasks.csv](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/tree/master/data/data_set2/jobTasks.csv)
* [machineRunSpeed.csv](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/blob/master/data/data_set2/machineRunSpeed.csv)
* [sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/blob/master/data/data_set2/sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv)

## Solution Formulation

We formulate a solution as a list of operations where and operation consists of JobId, taskId, sequence number, and machine for the task to run on. The order of the list determines the order in which the operations are scheduled.

For example, below is a feasible solution to a problem instance with 3 jobs, and 2 machine.  
Each row represents an operation in the form [jobId, taskId, sequence number, machine number, pieces].  

```python
[[0, 0, 0, 0, 10],
 [0, 1, 1, 1, 5],
 [1, 0, 0, 1, 8],
 [2, 0, 0, 0, 8],
 [1, 1, 1, 0, 5]]
```

Here is an example of an infeasible solution:

```python
[[0, 1, 1, 0, 5],
 [0, 0, 0, 0, 10],
 [1, 0, 0, 1, 8],
 [2, 0, 0, 0, 8],
 [1, 1, 1, 0, 5]]
```

The solution is infeasible because job 0, task 1 with sequence = 1 is scheduled on machine 0 before job 0, task 0 with sequence = 0.

To calculate the make span of a feasible solution we calculate the max of (total run time + total wait time + total setup time) for each machine, where

* run time = task pieces / machine speed
* wait time = time a machine has to wait for a task with sequence < current task's sequence to be processed 
* setup time = set up time before processing the current task


To produce a schedule for each machine given a feasible solution, we iterate over the solution and add each Job-Task to a queue for the machine specified in the operation.

## Program
### Requirements

First make sure you have the following packages installed:

Python 3.6  
python3-dev   
pip  
gcc

These can be installed with apt, yum, brew, etc.

To install the other requirements do the following:

1. clone repository
2. (optional) create virtual env
2. cd to the project directory
3. run `pip install -r requirements`

### Build

In the `cython_files` directory exists two .pyx files:

1. makespan_compiled.pyx
2. generate_neighbor.pyx

These files are compiled by [Cython](https://cython.org/), and are compiled to C-extensions.  
To build the C-extensions cd to the `cython_files` directory and run `python setup.py build --inplace`.  
For more information on building cython source code see the [link](https://cython.readthedocs.io/en/latest/src/userguide/source_files_and_compilation.html#basic-setup-py).

### Usage

main:
```bash
python main.py [-h] -t <runtime> -s <tabu size> -n <neighborhood size> -w <neighborhood wait>  <data directory>
```

benchmark:
```bash
python benchmark.py [-h] -t <runtime> -s <tabu size> -n <neighborhood size> -w <neighborhood wait> -i <benchmark iterations>  <data directory>
```

<br>

**Argument Descriptions**  

| Arg | Description |
| --- | --- |
| -h | prints a help message |  
| -t | runtime in seconds for tabu search |
| -s | tabu list size |  
| -n | neighborhood size |
| -w | max time in seconds to wait for generating a neighborhood |  
| -i | number of tabu searches to benchmark |
| data_dir | directory containing the files: <br> 1. jobTasks.csv <br> 2. machineRunSpeed.csv <br> 3. sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv|  


**Example**  

`python main.py -t 600 -s 200 -n 100 -w 1 ./data/data_set2`

**Note**

Job-Tasks in jobTasks.csv and sequenceDependencyMatrix.csv need to be in ascending order according to their (job_id, task_id)  
(see csv files in [data](https://github.com/mcfadd/Job_Shop_Schedule_Problem/tree/master/data) for reference)

## Program Design

Below is a basic high-level flow digram describing the design.

![Flow Diagram](diagrams/Flow_Diagram.png)
